This is part of a series of recollections, memories, stories about Tiger Bay, Cardiff
Docks, Bute Town, that area that has generated so much wealth and culture for Cardiff and
Wales.
Firstly let us say thank you here from HDA for the contribution of Heritage Lottery Wales
that's enabled us to undertake this short project.
Let's stop for a moment and think about horse racing, which you may think has nothing to
do with the docks.
Well, in horse racing, bloodlines are everything.
A good bloodline can make a horse worth millions.
Research in 2005 showed that virtually all half a million of the world's thoroughbred
racehorses are descended from 28 ancestors born in the 18th and 19th centuries and up
to 95% of male thoroughbreds can be traced back to just one stallion, that was the Dali
Arabian born in 1700.
So in horse racing just three stallions are said to be the founding fathers of all modern
day thoroughbred bloodlines.
The first was Bayerly Turk, followed by Dali Arabian and Godolphin Arabian.
All three were imported into Britain.
What does that have to do with Tiger Bay?
Well, Tiger Bay does not have an Arabian desert, but it certainly has enough people from Arab
countries, Yemen, Sudan, Djibouti, etc.
But it has sporting bloodlines that have made Welsh history, driven Welsh pride and made
sing the names of those black mixed race descendants of the bay.
Not just black, let me be clear, and not just mixed race.
Consider a Jamaican man born in 1876 who got on board a merchant ship and ended up in Cardiff
Docks.
His name was Uriah Erskine.
He settled in Cardiff and had children.
Two of his grandsons were the boxer Joe Erskine who won the British heavyweight title in 1956
in the main stadium in Cardiff.
Then he won the British Empire Commonwealth title in 1967, beating Henry Cooper.
Another of Uriah's grandsons was Johnny Freeman.
Because of racism in Rugby Union in Wales, Johnny was to change codes from Rugby Union
and play rugby league for Halifax.
He still holds the record for the highest number of tries scored in a single season
for Halifax.
48 tries in 1956-1957.
He represented Wales.
Both Joe Erskine and Johnny Freeman were born in 1934.
Both were born in Tiger Bay Bute Town and both have families still living locally.
Maybe bloodlines can be measured by the school you went to.
South Church Street School, for example, the school of Bute Town has a long list of sporting
icons that studied there.
Such as Colin Dixon, Bute Town boy that ended up playing for Halifax alongside Johnny Freeman
Colin was his captain.
He also played for Salford and Hull Kingston Rovers and Wales.
Also William John Boston from 7 Angelina Street.
Four doors from Joe Erskine in number 11.
Also born in 1934.
He went to South Church Street School.
He played rugby league for Wigan, Blackpool and Great Britain.
He scored a record 478 tries for Wigan.
It is said that he went north in part because he wanted to play for Cardiff Rugby Football
Club and knew in the end no black player was going to play for them.
And then there was Gus Risman born in Sophia Street.
Went to South Church Street School before moving to Barry.
He played for Workington and Great Britain and has a street named after him in Salford
and Workington.
Now Gus had two sons who went into rugby league.
Bev who was an England and British Lion international and John, former Workington player and Welsh
international.
Johnny Freeman, Joe Erskine, Dennis Brown, the Wales Rugby League international and many
others went to South Church Street.
These are Bute Town names.
Tiger Bay names and there are many others with family links to Bute Town, to the bay.
Such as Lewis Reese Zamit.
The fact of the matter is it's a small place.
A place with a big heart but hard working working class people who also made a massive
contribution to Wales.
Through sport certainly but also through many many other endeavours.
So if bloodlines are relevant in horse racing why aren't they recognised in terms of people
and their contribution to the country they became citizens of?
.